Constitution of Ukraine
Preamble
The Verkhovna Rada (the Parliament) of Ukraine on behalf of the Ukrainian people - Ukrainian
citizens of all nationalities,
expressing the sovereign will of the people,
relying on the centuries-old history of Ukrainian state-building and upon the right to self-
determination realised by the Ukrainian nation, all the Ukrainian people,
aspiring to ensure human rights and freedoms, and life conditions worthy of human dignity,
supporting the strengthening of civil harmony on the Ukrainian soil,
striving to develop and strengthen a democratic, social, law-based state,
realizing the responsibility in the eyes of God, before our own conscience, past, present and future
generations,
guided by the Act of Declaration of the Independence of Ukraine of 24 August 1991, approved by
the national vote on 1 December 1991,
adopts this Constitution as the Fundamental Law of Ukraine.
Title I
General Principles
Article 1. Ukraine shall be a sovereign and independent, democratic, social, law-based state.
Article 2. The sovereignty of Ukraine shall extend throughout its entire territory.
Ukraine shall be a unitary state.
The territory of Ukraine within its present borders shall be indivisible and inviolable.
Article 3. An individual, his life and health, honour and dignity, inviolability and security shall be
recognised in Ukraine as the highest social value.
Human rights and freedoms, and guarantees thereof shall determine the essence and course of
activities of the State. The State shall be responsible to the individual for its activities. Affirmingand ensuring human rights and freedoms shall be the main duty of the State.
Article 4. There shall be a single form of citizenship in Ukraine. The grounds for the acquisition
and termination of Ukrainian citizenship shall be determined by law.
Article 5. Ukraine shall be a republic.
The people shall be the bearer of sovereignty and the sole source of power in Ukraine. The people
shall exercise power directly or through the state authorities and local self-government bodies.
The right to determine and change the constitutional order in Ukraine shall belong exclusively to
the people and shall not be usurped by the State, its bodies, or officials.
No one shall usurp the State power.
Article 6. The State power in Ukraine shall be exercised with the consideration of its division into
legislative, executive, and judicial branches.
Legislative, executive, and judicial bodies shall exercise their authority within the limits
determined by this Constitution and in accordance with the laws of Ukraine.
Article 7. Local self-governance shall be recognised and guaranteed in Ukraine.
Article 8. The rule of law shall be recognised and effective in Ukraine.
The Constitution of Ukraine shall be regarded as superior law. Laws and other regulatory legal
acts shall be adopted on the basis of the Constitution of Ukraine and shall conform to it.
Norms of the Constitution of Ukraine shall be the norms of direct effect. Recourse to the court for
protection of constitutional rights and freedoms of an individual and citizen directly on basis of
the Constitution of Ukraine shall be guaranteed.
Article 9. International treaties in force, consented by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine as binding,
shall be an integral part of the national legislation of Ukraine.
Conclusion of international treaties, contravening the Constitution of Ukraine, shall be possible
only after introducing relevant amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine.
Article 10. The State language of Ukraine shall be the Ukrainian language.
The State shall ensure comprehensive development and functioning of the Ukrainian language in
all spheres of social life throughout the entire territory of Ukraine.
Free development, use, and protection of Russian and other languages of national minorities of
Ukraine shall be guaranteed in Ukraine.